When you think about the Pacific
Northwest you think of lush forests and
pristine rivers but there's a hidden
history that's left a lasting
environmental legacy.
This story began 75 years ago.
December 7, 1941.
A date which will live in infamy.
On the homefront America turned to its
natural resources and industry to arm
what Roosevelt called an "arsenal of democracy."
At Bonneville, half a million kilowatts
to serve the new war plants.
In the northwestern-most corner,
a struggling aviation company
called Boeing stepped up.
In huge Boeing plants out of tough metal
they forge America’s fighting bomber.
Boeing's revolutionary B-17 flying fortress
would change the course of World War II.
In a matter of months thousands of these bombers
blackened the skies over France and Germany.
The firepower of a dozen or more
high rate 50-caliber machine guns.
A bomb-load of three-and-a-half tons.
The B-17 was called the plane that won the war.
Most of them were built in Seattle.
Here they are, Americans at work.
Housewives and farmers, mechanics and teachers.
All races and all creeds, young and old a like.
Each contributes to the building of the bomber
that has been called the backbone of the
American air offensive.
Thirty thousand Boeing workers
churning out 15 planes a day
But like most manufacturing of that era
environmental impacts weren't top-of-mind.
Pollution from factories poured into
nearby rivers and streams contributing
to environmental problems we're still
dealing with today.
While Boeing has made strides rehabbing
Seattle's Duwamish River,
the waterway remains a superfund site.
Cleanup is far from complete.
Seattle was not the only place to pay
the environmental cost of war.
Throughout the Northwest,
war preparations were underway.
Timber was logged for airplane
hangars and troop barracks.
Portland turned out warships by the hundreds.
And in Hanford, Washington
they helped make the atomic bomb that
destroyed Nagasaki and brought an end to the war.
No one worried about the environmental
toll these efforts would take.
Victory was the priority.
And now 75 years later, we're still living with the
environmental consequences of becoming
Battle Ready.